# REFLECTION

The final project, even though the result doesn't look very complicated, demanded a lot of work and time. I originally planned to prepare two maps and two dougnut charts. The first map was supposed to have states color-coded for political voting results, while the second map, after clicking on selected state, would show migration outflows and inflows. I worked on the second map for a long time but I lacked skills to bring it to the point where it would work correctly. Because the deadline was approaching, I was researching other possible visualizations I could use to show state-to-state migration flows. I ended up doing a heatmap / matrix as it shows exactly what I wanted and the book I was learning from outside of the class (Helder da Rocha, "Learn D3.js") explains how to build such matrix step-by-step. Here I have to admit, I regret doing first seven class tutorials and skipping the remaining - it was a huge jump from the tutorials I did for the class to coding my final project. I was still looking at the code provided in github demo but the lack of practice caused me to suffer more than I had too. I think the tutorials, having short code and following steps that are easy to understand were most helpful in developing my own skills. I should have done all of them before jumping on a big project.

I didn't include any economic or political information on my map. After exloring the maps that are available on Census website I realized such analysis should be done on county level as there are significant discrepancies within each state. Such charts could be suggestive (for example 70% people moved from a state with a higher median house price to one with lower price) and misleading, as the difference between the two prices is not always significant. I should have spent more time in the beggining to plan for such analysis and decide what difference in price would be significant (maybe one standard deviotion? But for the country or maybe for each state? If for a state then I would need information at least about median price in each county, and I didn't have it). If I could go back I would definitely plan my analysis in detail. 

During the class critiques I heard from my classmates that a decade could be a lot of data to handle - I ended up focusing on the data available for July 2019 - July 2020 (last year available). Overall, dealing with data from outside sources caused a lot of frustration. After loading data as csv file to VScode, data was often containing some special characters, was having extra commas, or not enough of commas, which caused the data to not load to my function at all, or load incorrectly. I spent long hours cleaning data from extra characters and commas by hand in VScode. I could not imagine doing that for 10 years of records. Small things that are probably obvious for everybody knowing a bit about HTML and JS caused me a bit of frustriation too and fixing them took long hours from my days. One of such things, for example, is loading script in correct order. Or that having same varaible names in two JS files going to the same HTML will cause a problem. 

If I had more time I would prepare a solid plan for my economic analysis and make my doughnut charts. If I had more skills, I would prepare the interactive map I originally wanted. I really like the matrix / heatmap I made instead, however, I still think such interactive map would show better if people are moving to neighboring states or maybe far away. 